'\" t
.\" $Id$
.tr ~
.TH CNTLIST 5WN "Dec 2006" "WordNet 3.0" "WordNet\(tm File Formats"
.SH NAME
cntlist \- file listing number of times each tagged sense occurs in a
semantic concordance, sorted most to least frequently tagged

cntlist.rev \- file listing number of times each tagged sense occurs
in a semantic concordance, sorted by sense key
.SH DESCRIPTION
A cntlist file for a semantic concordance lists the number of times
each semantically tagged sense occurs in the concordance and its
sense number in the WordNet database.  Each line in the file
corresponds to a sense in the WordNet database to which at least one
semantic tag points.  Only senses that are tagged in a concordance are
in the concordance's cntlist file.

.SS WordNet Database \fIcntlist\fP File
In the WordNet database, words are assigned sense numbers based on
frequency of use in semantically tagged corpora.  The cntlist file used
by
.BR grind (1WN) 
to build the WordNet database and assign the sense numbers is a union
of the cntlist files from the various semantic concordances that were
formerly released by Princeton University.  This
combined cntlist file is provided with the WordNet package and is
found in the \fBWNSEARCHDIR\fP directory.

The \fIcntlist.rev\fP file is used at run-time by the WordNet
library code and browser interfaces to print in the output display the
number of times each sense has been tagged.
.SS File Format
Each line in a cntlist file contains information for one sense.  The
file is ordered from most to least frequently tagged sense.  The
fields are separated by one space, and each line is terminated with a
newline character.  Senses having the same \fItag_cnt\fP value are
listed in reverse alphabetical order of the \fIlemma\fP field of the
\fIsense_key\fP.

Each line in \fBcntlist\fP is of the form:

.RS
\fItag_cnt~~sense_key~~sense_number\fP
.RE

where \fItag_cnt\fP is the decimal number of times the sense is tagged
in the corresponding semantic concordance.  \fIsense_key\fP is a
WordNet sense encoding and \fIsense_number\fP is a WordNet sense
number as described in

The \fIcntlist.rev\fP file contains the same fields described above,
in the following order:

.RS
\fIsense_key~~sense_number~~tag_cnt\fP
.RE

.SH NOTES
Princeton no longer maintains or releases the Semantic Concordance
files.  The \fIcntlist\fP file used to order the senses in WordNet
3.0 was generated from the Semantic Concordance files at the point
that they were last updated in 2001.  In general, the order of senses
presented usually reflects what the user would expect, however sense
ordering is now less reliable than in prior releases and should not be
construed as an accurate indicator of frequency of use.
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES (UNIX)
.TP 20
.B WNHOME
Base directory for WordNet.  Default is
\fB/usr/local/WordNet-3.0\fP.
.TP 20
.B WNSEARCHDIR
Directory in which the WordNet database has been installed.  
Default is \fBWNHOME/dict\fP.
.SH REGISTRY (WINDOWS)
.TP 20
.B HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\eSOFTWARE\eWordNet\e3.0\eWNHome
Base directory for WordNet.  Default is
\fBC:\eProgram~Files\eWordNet\e3.0\fP.
.TP 20
.B HKEY_CURRENT_USER\eSOFTWARE\eWordNet\e3.0\ewnres
User's default browser options.
.SH FILES
.TP 20
.B cntlist, cntlist.rev
file of combined semantic concordance \fBcntlist\fP files.  Used to
assign sense numbers in WordNet database
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR grind (1WN),
.BR wnintro (5WN),
.BR senseidx (5WN).
