'\" t
.\" $Id$
.tr ~
.TH LEXNAMES 5WN "Dec 2006" "WordNet 3.0" "WordNet\(tm File Formats"
.SH NAME
List of WordNet lexicographer file names and numbers
.SH DESCRIPTION
During WordNet development synsets are organized into forty-five
lexicographer files based on syntactic category and logical groupings.
.BR grind (1WN)
processes these files and produces a database suitable for use with
the WordNet library, interface code, and other applications.  The
format of the lexicographer files is described in
.BR wninput (5WN).

A file number corresponds to each lexicographer file.  File numbers
are encoded in several parts of the WordNet system as an efficient way
to indicate a lexicographer file name.  The file \fBlexnames\fP lists
the mapping between file names and numbers, and can be used by
programs or end users to correlate the two.
.SS File Format
Each line in \fBlexnames\fP contains 3 tab separated fields, and is
terminated with a newline character.  The first field is the two digit
decimal integer file number.  (The first file in the list is numbered
\fB00\fP.)  The second field is the name of the lexicographer file that
is represented by that number, and the third field is an integer that
indicates the syntactic category of the synsets contained in the file.
This is simply a shortcut for programs and scripts, since the
syntactic category is also part of the lexicographer file's name.
.SS Syntactic Category
The syntactic category field is encoded as follows:

.RS
.nf
\fB1\fP	NOUN
\fB2\fP	VERB
\fB3\fP	ADJECTIVE
\fB4\fP	ADVERB
.fi
.RE
.SS Lexicographer Files
The names of the lexicographer files and their corresponding file
numbers are listed below along with a brief description each file's
contents. 

.RS
.TS
center ;
l l l.
\fBFile Number\fP	\fBName\fP	\fBContents\fP
_
00	adj.all	all adjective clusters
01	adj.pert	relational adjectives (pertainyms)	  
02	adv.all	all adverbs
03	noun.Tops	unique beginner for nouns
04	noun.act	nouns denoting acts or actions 
05	noun.animal	nouns denoting animals
06	noun.artifact	nouns denoting man-made objects	  
07	noun.attribute	nouns denoting attributes of people and objects  
08	noun.body	nouns denoting body parts  
09	noun.cognition	nouns denoting cognitive processes and contents
10	noun.communication	nouns denoting communicative processes and contents  
11	noun.event	nouns denoting natural events  
12	noun.feeling	nouns denoting feelings and emotions  
13	noun.food	nouns denoting foods and drinks  
14	noun.group	nouns denoting groupings of people or objects  
15	noun.location	nouns denoting spatial position 
16	noun.motive	nouns denoting goals  
17	noun.object	nouns denoting natural objects (not man-made)  
18	noun.person  	nouns denoting people
19	noun.phenomenon	nouns denoting natural phenomena  
20	noun.plant	nouns denoting plants 
21	noun.possession	nouns denoting possession and transfer of possession  
22	noun.process	nouns denoting natural processes  
23	noun.quantity	nouns denoting quantities and units of measure  
24	noun.relation	nouns denoting relations between people or things or ideas  
25	noun.shape	nouns denoting two and three dimensional shapes  
26	noun.state	nouns denoting stable states of affairs  
27	noun.substance	nouns denoting substances  
28	noun.time	nouns denoting time and temporal relations  
29	verb.body	verbs of grooming, dressing and bodily care  
30	verb.change	verbs of size, temperature change, intensifying, etc.  
31	verb.cognition	verbs of thinking, judging, analyzing, doubting  
32	verb.communication	verbs of telling, asking, ordering, singing  
33	verb.competition	verbs of fighting, athletic activities  
34	verb.consumption	verbs of eating and drinking  
35	verb.contact	verbs of touching, hitting, tying, digging  
36	verb.creation	verbs of sewing, baking, painting, performing  
37	verb.emotion	verbs of feeling  
38	verb.motion	verbs of walking, flying, swimming  
39	verb.perception	verbs of seeing, hearing, feeling 
40	verb.possession	verbs of buying, selling, owning  
41	verb.social	verbs of political and social activities and events  
42	verb.stative	verbs of being, having, spatial relations  
43	verb.weather	verbs of raining, snowing, thawing, thundering  
44	adj.ppl	participial adjectives
.TE
.RE
.SH NOTES
The lexicographer files are not included in the WordNet database package.
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES (UNIX)
.TP 20
.B WNHOME
Base directory for WordNet.  Default is
\fB/usr/local/WordNet-3.0\fP.
.TP 20
.B WNSEARCHDIR
Directory in which the WordNet database has been installed.  
Default is \fBWNHOME/dict\fP.
.SH REGISTRY (WINDOWS)
.TP 20
.B HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\eSOFTWARE\eWordNet\e3.0\eWNHome
Base directory for WordNet.  Default is
\fBC:\eProgram~Files\eWordNet\e3.0\fP.
.SH FILES
.TP 20
.B lexnames
list of lexicographer file names and numbers
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR grind (1WN),
.BR wnintro (5WN),
.BR wndb (5WN),
.BR wninput (5WN).
