'\" t
.\" $Id$
.tr ~
.TH WNB 1WN "Dec 2006" "WordNet 3.0" "WordNet\(tm User Commands"
.SH NAME
wnb \- WordNet window-based browser interface 
.SH SYNOPSIS
.LP
\fBwnb\fP
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBwnb(\|)\fP provides a window-based interface for browsing the
WordNet database, allowing synsets and relations to be displayed as
formatted text.  For each search word, different searches are
available based on syntactic category and information available in the
database.  

\fBwnb\fP is written in Tcl/Tk, which is available for Unix and Windows
platforms.  This allows the same code to work on all
supported WordNet platforms without modification.
.SH WNB WINDOWS
\fBwnb(\|)\fP was developed with the philosophy that only those
searches and buttons that are applicable at the current time are
displayed.  As a result, the appearance of the interface changes as it
is used.  Use the standard windowing system mouse functions to open
and close the WordNet Browser Window, move the window, and change its
size.

The WordNet Browser Window contains the following areas, from top to
bottom:
.TP 20
Menubar
A menubar runs along the top of the browser window with pulldown menus
and button
entitled \fBFile\fP, \fBHistory\fP, \fBOptions\fP, and \fBHelp\fP.
.TP 20
Search Word Entry 
Below the Menubar is a line for entering the search
word.  A search word can be a single word, hyphenated string, or a
collocation.  Case is ignored.  Although only uninflected forms of
words are usually stored in WordNet, users may search for inflected
forms.  WordNet's morphological processor finds the base form
automatically.
.TP 20
Search Selection
Below the Search Word Entry line is an area for selecting the search
type and senses to search.  Until a search word is entered this area
is blank.  After a search word is entered, buttons appear
corresponding to each syntactic category (\fBNoun\fP, \fBVerb\fP,
\fBAdjective\fP, \fBAdverb\fP) in which the search string is defined
in WordNet.  

At the right edge of the Search Selection line is a box for entering
sense numbers.  When this box is empty, search results for all senses
of the search word that match the search type are displayed.  The
search may be restricted to one or more specific senses by entering a
comma or space separated list of sense numbers in the \fBSenses\fP
box.  These sense numbers remain in effect until either the user
changes or deletes them, or a new search word is entered.
.TP 20
Results Window
Most of the browser window consists of a large text buffer for
displaying the results of WordNet searches.  Horizontal and vertical
scroll bars are present for scrolling through the output.
.TP 20
Status Line 
A status line is at the bottom of the browser window.
When search results are displayed in the Results Window, this status
line reflects the type of search selected.  When there is no search
word entered, your are prompted to \fB"Enter search word and press
return."\fP  If the search word entered is not in WordNet, the message
\fB"Sorry, no matches found."\fP is displayed.
.SH SEARCHING THE DATABASE
The WordNet browser navigates through WordNet in two steps.  First a
search word is entered and an overview of all the senses of the word
in all syntactic categories is displayed in the Results Window.  
The senses are
grouped by syntactic category, and each synset is annotated as
described above with \fIsynset_offset\fP, \fIlex_filename\fP, and
\fIsense_number\fP as dictated by the advanced search options set.
The overview search also indicates how many of the senses in each
syntactic category are represented in the tagged texts.  This is a way
for the user to determine whether a sense's sense number is based on
semantic tagging data, or was arbitrarily assigned.  For each sense that
has appeared in such texts, the number of semantic tags to that sense
are indicated in parentheses after the sense number.

Then, within a syntactic category, a specific search is selected.  The
desired search is performed and the search results are displayed in
the Results Window.  Additional searches on the same word can be
performed, or a new search word can be entered.

To enter a search word, click the mouse in the horizontal box labeled
\fBSearch Word\fP, type a single word, hyphenated string, or
collocation and press
.SB RETURN.

\fBwnb(\|)\fP responds by making a set of Part of Speech buttons appear in
the Search Selection line.  Each button corresponds to a syntactic
category in which the search string is defined in WordNet.  At the
same time, an Overview of the synsets for all senses of the search
word is displayed in the Results Window.  The Overview includes the
gloss for each synset and also indicates which of the senses have
appeared in the semantically tagged texts.  For each sense that has
appeared in such texts, the number of semantic tags to that sense are
indicated in parentheses after the sense number.

The pulldown menus in the Search Selection line list all of the
WordNet searches that can be performed for the search word in that
part of speech.  To select a search, highlight it by dragging the
mouse to it, and release the mouse while it is highlighted.  Drag the
mouse outside of the pulldown list and release to hide the menu
without making a selection.  Dragging the mouse across the Part of
Speech buttons displays the available searches for each syntactic
category.

To restrict a search to one or more senses within a syntactic
category, enter a comma or space separated list of sense numbers in
the \fBSenses\fP box before selecting a search.

After a search is selected, \fBwnb(\|)\fP performs the search on the
WordNet database and displays the formatted results in the Results
Window.  Whenever search results are displayed, a button entitled
\fBRedisplay Overview\fP is present at the right edge of the Search Word
Entry line.  Clicking on this button redisplays the Overview of all
synsets for the search word in the Results Window.
.SS Changing the Search Word
A new search word can be entered at any time by moving to the Search
Word Entry box, if necessary highlighting it by clicking, erasing the
old string, typing a new one and pressing
.SB RETURN.
The \fBSenses\fP box is cleared if necessary, the Part of Speech buttons
applicable to the new search word appear, and the Overview for the new
search word is displayed.  

The middle mouse button can also be used to select a new search word
by placing the mouse over any word in the Results Window and
clicking.  The selected word will replace the text in the Search Word
Entry box, and the overview for that word will automatically be
displayed.

To select a new search string collocation from text in the
Results Window, highlight the text with the mouse and press
.SB CONTROL-S.

.SS Interrupting a Search
When a search is in progress the message \fB"Searching...(press escape
to abort)"\fP is displayed in the Status Line.  Note that most
searches return very quickly, so this message isn't noticeable.  As
indicated, pressing the
.SB ESCAPE
key will interrupt the search.  The results of the search obtained
before the time the search was interrupted are displayed in the
Results Window.
.SH MENUS
.SS File Menu
.RS
.IP "Find keywords by substring"
Display a popup window for specifying a search of WordNet for words or
collocations that contain a specific substring.  If a search word is
currently entered in the \fBSearch Word\fP box, it is used as the
substring to search for by default.  The Substring Search Window
contains a box for entering a substring, a pulldown menu to its right
for specifying the part of speech to search, a large area for
displaying the search results, and action buttons at the bottom
entitled \fBSearch\fP, \fBSave\fP, \fBPrint\fP \fBDismiss\fP. 

Once a substring is entered and a part of speech selected, clicking on
the \fBSearch\fP button causes a search to be done for all words and
collocations in WordNet, in that syntactic category, that contain the
substring according to the following criteria:

1. The substring can appear at the beginning or end of a word, hyphenated
string o collocation.

2. The substring can appear in the middle of a hyphenated string or
collocation, but only delimited on both sides by spaces or
hyphens.

The search results are displayed in the large buffer.  Clicking on an
item from the search results list causes \fBwnb(\|)\fP to automatically
enter that word in the \fBSearch Word\fP box of the WordNet Browser
Window and perform the Overview search.

Clicking the \fBSave\fP button generates a popup dialog for specifying
a filename to save the substring search results to.  Clicking the
\fBPrint\fP button generates a popup dialog in which a print command
can be specified.

Selecting \fBDismiss\fP closes the Substring Search Window.
.IP "Save current display"
Display a popup dialog for specifying a filename to save the current
Results Window contents to.
.IP "Print current display"
Display a popup dialog in which to specify a print command to which
the current Results Window contents can be piped. Note - this option
does not exist in the Windows version.
.IP "Clear current display"
Clear the \fBSearch Word\fP and \fBSenses\fP boxes, and Results
Window.
.IP "Exit"
Does what you would expect.
.RE
.SS History
This pulldown menu contains a list of the last searches performed.
Selecting an item from this list performs that search again.  The
maximum number of searches stored in the list can be adjusted from the
\fBOptions\fP menu.  The default is 10.
.SS Options
.RS
.IP "Show help with each search"
When this checkbox is selected search results are preceded by some
explanatory text about the type of search selected. This is off by
default.
.IP "Show descriptive gloss"
When this checkbox is selected, synset glosses are displayed in all
search results.  This is set by default.  Note that glosses are always
displayed in the Overview.
.IP "Wrap Lines"
When this checkbox is selected, lines in the Results Window that are
wider than the window are automatically wrapped.  This is set by
default.  If not selected, a horizontal scroll bar is present if any
lines are longer than the width of the window.
.IP "Set advanced search options..."
Selecting this item displays a popup window for setting the following
search options:  \fBLexical file information; Synset location in database
file; Sense number\fP.  Choices for each are:

.nf
	\fBDon't show\fP (default)
	\fBShow with searches\fP
	\fBShow with searches and overview\fP
.fi

When lexical file information is shown, the name of the lexicographer
file is printed before each synset, enclosed in angle brackets
(\fB<~~\fI...\fB~~>\fR).  When both lexical file information and
synset location information are displayed, the synset location
information appears first.  If within one lexicographer file more than
one sense of a word is entered, an integer \fIlex_id\fP is appended
onto all but one of the word's instances to uniquely identify it.  In
each synset, each word having a non-zero \fIlex_id\fP is printed with
the \fIlex_id\fP value printed immediately following the word.  If
both lexicographer information and sense numbers are displayed,
\fIlex_id\fPs, if present, precede sense numbers.

When synset location is shown, the byte offset of the synset in the
database "data" file corresponding to the syntactic category of the
synset is printed before each synset, enclosed in curly braces
(\fB{~~\fI...\fB~~}\fR).  When both lexical file information and
synset location information are displayed, the synset location
information appears first.

When sense numbers are shown, the sense number of each word in each
synset is printed immediately after the word, and is preceded by a
number sign (\fB#\fP).
.IP "Set maximum history length..."
Display a popup dialog in which the maximum number of previous
searches to be kept on the History list can be set.
.IP "Set font...~~~~~~~~~~~"
Display a popup window for setting the font (typeface) and font size
to use for the Results Window.  Choices for typeface are: \fBCourier\fP,
\fBHelvetica\fP, and \fBTimes\fP (default).  Font size can be
\fBsmall\fP, \fBmedium\fP (default), or \fBlarge\fP.
.IP "Save current options as default"
Save the currently set options.  Next time the browser is started,
these options will be used as the user defaults.
.RE
.SS Help
.RS
.IP "Help on using the WordNet browser"
Display this manual page.
.IP "Help on WordNet terminology"
Display the 
.BR wngloss (7WN)
manual page.
.IP "Display the WordNet license"
Display the WordNet copyright notice and license agreement.
.IP "About the WordNet browser"
Information about this application.
.RE
.SH SHORCUTS
Clicking on any word in the Results Window while holding down the 
.SB SHIFT
key on the keyboard causes the browser to replace \fBSearch
Word\fP with the word and display its Overview and available searches.
Clicking on any word in the Results Window with the middle mouse
button does the same thing.

Pressing the
.SB CONTROL-S
keys causes the browser to do as above on the text that is currently
highlighted.  Under Unix, this will work even if the highlighted text
is in another window.  This works on
hyphenated strings and collocations, as well as individual words.

Pressing the
.SB CONTROL-G 
keys displays the Substring Search Window.

.SH SEARCH RESULTS
The results of a search of the WordNet database are displayed in the
Results Window.  Horizontal and vertical scroll bars are present for
scrolling through the search results.

All searches other than the Overview list all senses matching the
search results in the following general format.  Items enclosed in
italicized square brackets (\fI[~...~]\fP) may not be present.

If a search cannot be performed on some senses of \fIsearchstr\fP, the
search results are headed by a string of the form:
.nf
	X of Y senses of \fIsearchstr\fP
.fi

.RS
One line listing the number of senses matching the search selected.

Each sense matching the search selected displayed as follows:

.nf
	\fBSense \fIn\fR
	\fI[\fB{\fIsynset_offset\fB}\fI] [\fB<\fIlex_filename\fB>\fI]~~word1[\fB#\fIsense_number][,~~word2...]\fR
.fi

Where \fIn\fP is the sense number of the search word,
\fIsynset_offset\fP is the byte offset of the synset in the
\fBdata.\fIpos\fR file corresponding to the syntactic category,
\fIlex_filename\fP is the name of the lexicographer file that the
synset comes from, \fIword1\fP is the first word in the synset (note
that this is not necessarily the search word) and \fIsense_number\fP
is the WordNet sense number assigned to the preceding word.
\fIsynset_offset\fP, \fIlex_filename\fP, and \fIsense_number\fP are
generated if the appropriate Options are specified.

The synsets matching the search selected are printed below each
sense's synset output described above.  Each line of output is
preceded by a marker (usually \fB=>\fP), then a synset, formatted as
described above.  If a search traverses more one level of the tree,
then successive lines are indented by spaces corresponding to its
level in the hierarchy.  Glosses are displayed in parentheses at the
end of each synset if the appropriate Option is set.  Each synset is
printed on one line.

Senses are ordered from most to least frequently used, with
the most common sense numbered \fB1\fP.  Frequency of use is
determined by the number of times a sense is tagged in the various
semantic concordance texts.  Senses that are not semantically tagged
follow the ordered senses. Note that this ordering is only an
estimate based on usage in a small corpus.

Verb senses can be grouped by similarity of meaning, rather
than ordered by frequency of use.  When the \fB"Synonyms, grouped by
similarity"\fP search is selected, senses that are close
in meaning are printed together, with a line of dashes indicating the
end of a group.  See
.BR wngroups (7WN)
for a discussion how senses are grouped.

The output of the \fB"Derivationally Related Forms"\fP 
search shows word forms that are
morphologically related to \fBsearchstr\fP. Each word form pointed to
from \fIsearchstr\fP is displayed, preceded by \fBRELATED TO->\fP and
the syntactic category of the link, followed, on the next line, by its
synset.  Printed after the word form is \fB#\fP\fIn\fP where \fIn\fP
indicates the WordNet sense number of the term pointed to.

The \fB"Domain"\fP and \fB"Domain Terms"\fP searches show the domain that a
synset has been classified in and, conversely, all of the terms that
have been assigned to a specific domain.  A domain is
either a \fBTOPIC,\fP \fBREGION\fP or \fBUSAGE,\fP as reflected in
the specific pointer character stored in the database, and displayed
in the output.  A \fBDomain\fP search on a term shows the domain, if
any, that each synset containing \fIsearchstr\fP has been classified
in.  The output display shows the domain type (\fBTOPIC,\fP
\fBREGION\fP or \fBUSAGE\fP), followed by the syntactic category of
the domain synset and the terms in the synset.  Each term is followed
by \fB#\fP\fIn\fP where \fIn\fP indicates the WordNet sense number of
the term.  The converse search, \fBDomain Terms\fP, shows all of the synsets
that have been placed into the domain \fIsearchstr\fP, with analogous
markers. 

When the \fB"Sentence Frames"\fP search is specified, sample
illustrative sentences and generic sentence frames are displayed.  If
a sample sentence is found, the base form of the search word is
substituted into the sentence, and it is printed below the synset,
preceded with the \fBEX:\fP marker.  When no sample sentences are
found, the generic sentence frames are displayed.  Sentence frames
that are acceptable for all words in a synset are preceded by the
marker \fB*>\fP.  If a frame is acceptable for the search word only,
it is preceded by the marker \fB=>\fP.

Search results for adjectives are slightly different from those for
other parts of speech.  When an adjective is printed, its direct
antonym, if it has one, is also printed in parentheses.  When
the search word is in a head synset, all of the head synset's
satellites are also displayed.  The position of an adjective in
relation to the noun may be restricted to the \fIprenominal\fP,
\fIpostnominal\fP or \fIpredicative\fP position.  Where present, these
restrictions are noted in parentheses.

When an adjective is a participle of a verb, the output indicates the
verb and displays its synset.

When an adverb is derived from an adjective, the specific adjectival
sense on which it is based is indicated.

The morphological transformations performed by the search code may
result in more than one word to search for.  \fBwnb(\|)\fP
automatically performs the requested search on all of the strings and
returns the results grouped by word.  For example, the verb \fBsaw\fP
is both the present tense of \fBsaw\fP and the past tense of
\fBsee\fP.  When there is more than one word to search for, search
results are grouped by word.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
If the WordNet database files cannot be opened, error messages are
displayed.  This is usually corrected by setting the environment
variables described below to the proper location of the WordNet
database for your installation.
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES (UNIX)
.TP 20
.B WNHOME
Base directory for WordNet.  Default is
\fB/usr/local/WordNet-3.0\fP.
.TP 20
.B WNSEARCHDIR
Directory in which the WordNet database has been installed.  
Default is \fBWNHOME/dict\fP.
.SH REGISTRY (WINDOWS)
.TP 20
.B HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\eSOFTWARE\eWordNet\e3.0\eWNHome
Base directory for WordNet.  Default is
\fBC:\eProgram~Files\eWordNet\e3.0\fP.
.TP 20
.B HKEY_CURRENT_USER\eSOFTWARE\eWordNet\e3.0\ewnres
User's default browser options.
.SH FILES
.TP 20
.B index.\fIpos\fP
database index files
.TP 20
.B data.\fIpos\fP
database data files
.TP 20
.B *.vrb
files of sentences illustrating the use of verbs
.TP 20
.B \fIpos\fP.exc
morphology exception lists
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR wnintro (1WN),
.BR wn (1WN),
.BR wnintro (3WN),
.BR lexnames (5WN),
.BR senseidx (5WN),
.BR wndb (5WN), 
.BR wninput (5WN),
.BR morphy (7WN), 
.BR wngloss (7WN),
.BR wngroups (7WN).
.SH BUGS
Please reports bugs to wordnet@princeton.edu.
