'\" t
.\" $Id$
.tr ~
.TH WNDB 5WN "Dec 2006" "WordNet 3.0" "WordNet\(tm File Formats"
.SH NAME
index.noun, data.noun, index.verb, data.verb, index.adj, data.adj, index.adv, data.adv \- WordNet database files
.LP
noun.exc, verb.exc. adj.exc adv.exc \- morphology exception lists
.LP
sentidx.vrb, sents.vrb \- files used by search code to display
sentences illustrating the use of some specific verbs
.SH DESCRIPTION
For each syntactic category, two files are needed to represent the
contents of the WordNet database \- \fBindex.\fP\fIpos\fP and
\fBdata.\fP\fIpos\fP, where \fIpos\fP is \fBnoun\fP, \fBverb\fP,
\fBadj\fP and \fBadv\fP.  The other auxiliary files are used by the
WordNet library's searching functions and are needed to run the
various WordNet browsers.

Each index file is an alphabetized list of all the words found in
WordNet in the corresponding part of speech.  On each line, following
the word, is a list of byte offsets (\fIsynset_offset\fPs) in the
corresponding data file, one for each synset containing the word.
Words in the index file are in lower case only, regardless of how they
were entered in the lexicographer files.  This folds various
orthographic representations of the word into one line enabling
database searches to be case insensitive.  See
.BR wninput (5WN)
for a detailed description of the lexicographer files

A data file for a syntactic category contains information
corresponding to the synsets that were specified in the lexicographer
files, with relational pointers resolved to \fIsynset_offset\fPs.
Each line corresponds to a synset.  Pointers are followed and
hierarchies traversed by moving from one synset to another via the
\fIsynset_offset\fPs.  

The exception list files, \fIpos\fP\fB.exc\fP, are used to help the
morphological processor find base forms from irregular inflections.

The files \fBsentidx.vrb\fP and \fBsents.vrb\fP contain sentences
illustrating the use of specific senses of some verbs.  These files
are used by the searching software in response to a request for verb
sentence frames.  Generic sentence frames are displayed when an
illustrative sentence is not present.

The various database files are in ASCII formats that are easily read
by both humans and machines.  All fields, unless otherwise noted, are
separated by one space character, and all lines are terminated by a
newline character.  Fields enclosed in italicized square brackets may
not be present.

See 
.BR wngloss (7WN)
for a glossary of WordNet terminology and a discussion of the
database's content and logical organization.
.SS Index File Format
Each index file begins with several lines containing a copyright
notice, version number and license agreement.  These lines all begin
with two spaces and the line number so they do not interfere with the
binary search algorithm that is used to look up entries in the index
files.  All other lines are in the following format.  In the field
descriptions, \fBnumber\fP always refers to a decimal integer unless
otherwise defined.

.nf
\fIlemma~~pos~~synset_cnt~~p_cnt~~[ptr_symbol...]~~sense_cnt~~tagsense_cnt ~~synset_offset~~[synset_offset...]\fP
.fi

.TP 15
.I lemma
lower case ASCII text of word or collocation.  Collocations are formed
by joining individual words with an underscore (\fB_\fP) character.
.TP 15
.I pos
Syntactic category: \fBn\fP for noun files, 
\fBv\fP for verb files, \fBa\fP for adjective files, \fBr\fP for
adverb files.

.LP
All remaining fields are with respect to senses of \fIlemma\fP in
\fIpos\fP.

.TP 15
.I synset_cnt
Number of synsets that \fIlemma\fP is in.  This is the
number of senses of the word in WordNet. See 
.SM \fBSense Numbers\fP
below for a discussion of how sense numbers are assigned and the order
of \fIsynset_offset\fPs in the index files.
.TP 15
.I p_cnt
Number of different pointers that \fIlemma\fP has in all synsets
containing it.
.TP 15
.I ptr_symbol
A space separated list of \fIp_cnt\fP different types of pointers that
\fIlemma\fP has in all synsets containing it. See
.BR wninput (5WN)
for a list of \fIpointer_symbol\fPs.  If all senses of \fIlemma\fP
have no pointers, this field is omitted and \fIp_cnt\fP is \fB0\fP.
.TP 15
.I sense_cnt
Same as \fIsense_cnt\fP above.  This is redundant, but the field was
preserved for compatibility reasons.
.TP 15
.I tagsense_cnt
Number of senses of \fIlemma\fP that are ranked according to
their frequency of occurrence in semantic concordance texts.
.TP 15
.I synset_offset
Byte offset in \fBdata.\fIpos\fR file of a synset containing
\fIlemma\fP.  Each \fIsynset_offset\fP in the list corresponds to a
different sense of \fIlemma\fP in WordNet.  \fIsynset_offset\fP is an
8 digit, zero-filled decimal integer that can be used with
.BR fseek (3)
to read a synset from the data file.  When passed to
.BR read_synset (3WN)
along with the syntactic category, a data structure containing the
parsed synset is returned.
.SS Data File Format
Each data file begins with several lines containing a copyright
notice, version number and license agreement.  These lines all begin
with two spaces and the line number.  All other lines are in the
following format.  Integer fields are of fixed length, and are
zero-filled.

.nf
\fIsynset_offset~~lex_filenum~~ss_type~~w_cnt~~word~~lex_id~~[word~~lex_id...]~~p_cnt~~[ptr...]~~[frames...]~~\fB|\fP\fI~~gloss\fP
.fi

.TP 15
.I synset_offset
Current byte offset in the file represented as an 8 digit decimal
integer. 
.TP 15
.I lex_filenum
Two digit decimal integer corresponding to the lexicographer file name
containing the synset.  See
.BR lexnames (5WN)
for the list of filenames and their corresponding numbers.
.TP 15
.I ss_type
One character code indicating the synset type: 

.RS
.nf
\fBn\fP	NOUN
\fBv\fP	VERB
\fBa\fP	ADJECTIVE
\fBs\fP	ADJECTIVE SATELLITE
\fBr\fP	ADVERB
.fi
.RE
.TP 15
.I w_cnt
Two digit hexadecimal integer indicating the number of words in the
synset.
.TP 15
.I word
ASCII form of a word as entered in the synset by the lexicographer,
with spaces replaced by underscore characters (\fB_\fP).  The text of
the word is case sensitive, in contrast to its form in the
corresponding \fBindex.\fP\fIpos\fP file, that contains only
lower-case forms.  In \fBdata.adj\fP, a \fIword\fP is followed by a
syntactic marker if one was specified in the lexicographer file.  A
syntactic marker is appended, in parentheses, onto \fIword\fP without
any intervening spaces.  See
.BR wninput (5WN)
for a list of the syntactic markers for adjectives.
.TP 15
.I lex_id
One digit hexadecimal integer that, when appended onto \fIlemma\fP,
uniquely identifies a sense within a lexicographer file.  \fIlex_id\fP
numbers usually start with \fB0\fP, and are incremented as additional
senses of the word are added to the same file, although there is no
requirement that the numbers be consecutive or begin with \fB0\fP.
Note that a value of \fB0\fP is the default, and therefore is not
present in lexicographer files. 
.TP 15
.I p_cnt
Three digit decimal integer indicating the number of pointers from
this synset to other synsets.  If \fIp_cnt\fP is \fB000\fP the synset
has no pointers.
.TP 15
.I ptr
A pointer from this synset to another.  \fIptr\fP is of the form:

.nf
\fIpointer_symbol~~synset_offset~~pos~~source/target\fR
.fi

where \fIsynset_offset\fP is the byte offset of the target synset in
the data file corresponding to \fIpos\fP.

The \fIsource/target\fP field distinguishes lexical and semantic
pointers.  It is a four byte field, containing two two-digit
hexadecimal integers.  The first two digits indicates the word number
in the current (source) synset, the last two digits indicate the word
number in the target synset.  A value of \fB0000\fP means that
\fIpointer_symbol\fP represents a semantic relation between the
current (source) synset and the target synset indicated by
\fIsynset_offset\fP.

A lexical relation between two words in different synsets is
represented by non-zero values in the source and target word numbers.
The first and last two bytes of this field indicate the word numbers
in the source and target synsets, respectively, between which the
relation holds.  Word numbers are assigned to the \fIword\fP fields in
a synset, from left to right, beginning with \fB1\fP.

See 
.BR wninput (5WN)
for a list of \fIpointer_symbol\fPs, and semantic and lexical pointer
classifications.
.TP 15
.I frames
In \fBdata.verb\fP only, a list of numbers corresponding to the
generic verb sentence frames for \fIword\fPs in the synset.  
\fIframes\fP is of the form:

.nf
\fIf_cnt~~\fP \fB+\fP \fI~~f_num~~w_num~~[\fP \fB+\fP \fI~~f_num~~w_num...]\fP
.fi

where \fIf_cnt\fP a two digit decimal integer indicating the number of
generic frames listed, \fIf_num\fP is a two digit decimal integer
frame number, and \fIw_num\fP is a two digit hexadecimal integer
indicating the word in the synset that the frame applies to.  As with
pointers, if this number is \fB00\fP, \fIf_num\fP applies to all
\fIword\fPs in the synset.  If non-zero, it is applicable only to the
word indicated.  Word numbers are assigned as described for pointers.
Each \fIf_num~~w_num\fP pair is preceded by a \fB+\fP.
See
.BR wninput (5WN)
for the text of the generic sentence frames.
.TP
.I gloss
Each synset contains a gloss.  A \fIgloss\fP is represented as a
vertical bar (\fB|\fP), followed by a text string that continues until
the end of the line.  The gloss may contain a definition, one or more
example sentences, or both.
.SS Sense Numbers
Senses in WordNet are generally ordered from most to least frequently
used, with the most common sense numbered \fB1\fP.  Frequency of use is
determined by the number of times a sense is tagged in the various
semantic concordance texts.  Senses that are not semantically tagged
follow the ordered senses.  The \fItagsense_cnt\fP field for each
entry in the \fBindex.\fIpos\fR files indicates how many of the senses
in the list have been tagged.

The 
.BR cntlist (5WN)
file provided with the database lists the number of times each sense
is tagged in the semantic concordances.  The data from \fBcntlist\fP
is used by
.BR grind (1WN)
to order the senses of each word.  When the \fBindex\fP.\fIpos\fP
files are generated, the \fIsynset_offset\fPs are output in sense
number order, with sense 1 first in the list.  Senses with the same
number of semantic tags are assigned unique but consecutive sense
numbers.  The WordNet 
.SB OVERVIEW
search displays all senses of the
specified word, in all syntactic categories, and indicates which of
the senses are represented in the semantically tagged texts.
.SS Exception List File Format
Exception lists are alphabetized lists of inflected forms of words and
their base forms.  The first field of each line is an inflected form,
followed by a space separated list of one or more base forms of the
word.  There is one exception list file for each syntactic category.

Note that the noun and verb exception lists were automatically
generated from a machine-readable dictionary, and contain many words
that are not in WordNet.  Also, for many of the inflected forms, base
forms could be easily derived using the standard rules of detachment
programmed into Morphy (See
.BR morph (7WN)).
These anomalies are allowed to remain in the exception list files,
as they do no harm.

.SS Verb Example Sentences
For some verb senses, example sentences illustrating the use of the
verb sense can be displayed.  Each line of the file \fBsentidx.vrb\fP
contains a \fIsense_key\fP followed by a space and a comma separated
list of example sentence template numbers, in decimal.  The file
\fBsents.vrb\fP lists all of the example sentence templates.  Each
line begins with the template number followed by a space.  The rest of
the line is the text of a template example sentence, with \fB%s\fP
used as a placeholder in the text for the verb.  Both files are sorted
alphabetically so that the \fIsense_key\fP and template sentence
number can be used as indices, via
.BR binsrch (3WN), 
into the appropriate file.

When a request for 
.SB FRAMES
is made, the WordNet search code looks
for the sense in \fBsentidx.vrb\fP.  If found, the sentence
template(s) listed is retrieved from \fBsents.vrb\fP, and the \fB%s\fP
is replaced with the verb.  If the sense is not found, the applicable
generic sentence frame(s) listed in \fIframes\fP is displayed.
.SH NOTES
Information in the \fBdata.\fIpos\fR and \fBindex.\fIpos\fR files
represents all of the word senses and synsets in the WordNet database.
The \fIword\fP, \fIlex_id\fP, and \fIlex_filenum\fP fields together
uniquely identify each word sense in WordNet.  These can be encoded in
a \fIsense_key\fP as described in
.BR senseidx (5WN).
Each synset in the database can be uniquely identified by combining
the \fIsynset_offset\fP for the synset with a code for the syntactic
category (since it is possible for synsets in different
\fBdata.\fIpos\fR files to have the same \fIsynset_offset\fP).

The WordNet system provide both command line and window-based browser
interfaces to the database.  Both interfaces utilize a common library
of search and morphology code.  The source code for the library and
interfaces is included in the WordNet package.  See
.BR wnintro (3WN)
for an overview of the WordNet source code.
.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES (UNIX)
.TP 20
.B WNHOME
Base directory for WordNet.  Default is
\fB/usr/local/WordNet-3.0\fP.
.TP 20
.B WNSEARCHDIR
Directory in which the WordNet database has been installed.  
Default is \fBWNHOME/dict\fP.
.SH REGISTRY (WINDOWS)
.TP 20
.B HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE\eSOFTWARE\eWordNet\e3.0\eWNHome
Base directory for WordNet.  Default is
\fBC:\eProgram~Files\eWordNet\e3.0\fP.
.SH FILES
.TP 20
.B index.\fIpos\fP
database index files
.TP 20
.B data.\fIpos\fP
database data files
.TP 20
.B *.vrb
files of sentences illustrating the use of verbs
.TP 20
.B \fIpos\fP.exc
morphology exception lists
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR grind (1WN),
.BR wn (1WN),
.BR wnb (1WN),
.BR wnintro (3WN),
.BR binsrch (3WN),
.BR wnintro (5WN),
.BR cntlist (5WN),
.BR lexnames (5WN),
.BR senseidx (5WN),
.BR wninput (5WN),
.BR morphy (7WN),
.BR wngloss (7WN),
.BR wngroups (7WN),
.BR wnstats (7WN).
